---
layout: essay
type: essay
published: true
title: HACC 2016
date: 2016-11-25
labels:
  - Hackathon
  - Portfolio
---

I had the great pleasure of participating in the first [Hawaii Annual Code Challenge](energy-excelerator-2014.md), held from August 27-September 24, 2016.  The goal of HACC is to "engage the local tech community in the modernization of Hawaii State Government" through a month-long hackathon to develop solutions to a pre-selected set of problems faced by community organizations:

<table class="ui celled compact table">
<thead>
  <th>Organization</th>
  <th>Problem</th>
</thead>

<tbody>
  <tr><td>Oahu Community Correctional Facility</td>
      <td>A more efficient way to schedule over 300 visits per week by over 8000 approved visitors</td>
  </tr>
  <tr><td>Hawaii Farmer's Markets</td>
      <td>A centralized portal providing information regarding 200+ markets statewide;</td>
    </tr>
  <tr><td>Hawaii Agriculture Food Products</td>
       <td>Increased visibility and access to locally grown products</td>
  </tr>
  <tr><td>Department of Health</td>
      <td>Help people with disabilities to compete more effectively for jobs.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr><td>IHS</td>
      <td>Help homelessness outreach teams respond more effectively to community referrals.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr><td>Department of Community Services</td>
      <td>Provide a yelp-like application that enables the elderly and their care providers to find services.</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Why is HACC cool?

I've been involved with many hackathons, but several things about HACC appeal to me:

*A focus on helping pre-selected community organizations.*  Many hackathons adopt one of the following two organizing principles: (1) create an app to illustrate a viable business model; or (2) create an app that applies a technology recently released by a sponsor. While these can be fun, it is refreshing to have a hackathon focus on specific, pre-selected community problems and ask the technology community to solve them as best they can, regardless of whether the solution would appeal to a venture capitalist or utilize some new tech hack.

*A month, not a weekend.* Many hackathons are from 24 to 48 hours long. The short duration limits how ambitious a team can be. A month provides more time for research into problem areas, stakeholder engagement, and application refinement.

*It's about Hawaii, not Silicon Valley.* Many hackathons have an implicit focus on what would sell in Silicon Valley. HACC is all about Hawaii. I love that.

### Kipa

I went to the kickoff event just to see what HACC was all about. Within a few days I found myself on a team with [McKay Davis](https://devpost.com/McKayDavis), [Cam Moore](https://cammoore.github.io/), [Kelemete Seto](https://www.linkedin.com/in/kelemeteseto), and [Mike Peacock](https://devpost.com/hawaiivet2vet). We took on the challenge of creating a scheduling solution for OCCC and implemented a system called [Kipa](https://hacc2016.github.io/teamkipa/) using [Meteor](http://www.meteor.com) and [Semantic UI](http://semantic-ui.com/).

Here is a one minute video illustrating the essential features of Kipa:

<div class="ui embed" data-source="youtube" data-id="COLaTvaCj7U" >
</div>

I am pretty happy with Kipa:

First, we put a lot of design effort into usability. OCCC visitors are usually not technically sophisticated, and may only be able to access a computer at a library. That said, most have cell phones with text messaging. Kipa recognizes these constraints and uses SMS as a primary communication channel.

Second, as with virtually any scheduling scenario, there are organization-specific scheduling "gotchas". For example, the 10:00am and 10:30am slots are reserved for female detainees.  Kipa provides an extensible set of "hooks" to implement constraints on the scheduling. 

Third, the application exploits the reactive nature of Meteor, and works well across platforms (desktop, tablet, mobile).

For details on Kipa, including a walkthrough of the system, screen shots, and access to the code, please see the [Kipa Home Page](https://hacc2016.github.io/teamkipa/).

### Lessons learned

I am already looking forward to HACC 2017. Here are some lessons learned for students who might want to get involved next year. 

*HACC is a super efficient way to build your professional portfolio.*  In just one month, HACC can provide you with a project for your portfolio (see [mine](/projects)) in which you worked in a team to build an interesting solution to  an important societal problem.  

*Pick one project and commit to it.*  Some people participated in 2, 3, even 4 projects.  I don't recommend that, because during the "crunch time" (i.e. the last week) you'll have to split your time between multiple projects just when each project (and team) is hoping for your undivided attention. 
 
*If at all possible, build a team that includes a videographer.* Now that you've seen my little screencast about Kipa, take a look at this video from the winning team:

<div class="ui embed" data-source="youtube" data-id="7QVtMXWaRBs" >
</div>

There's just no doubt about it: this video is stunning and head-and-shoulders above every other team's submission. 

*A mobile CRUD app is the baseline.*  Most of the competitive submissions implemented a [CRUD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete) application that could be displayed on a smart phone. Any ICS student who has taken ICS 314 will have more than enough background to satisfy this baseline criteria for success.
  
*Provide special sauce.*  While a mobile CRUD app is usually the first step, a month provides you enough time to think creatively about how to make your app do something special. (For example, Kipa extends a mobile CRUD app for OCC scheduling with three additional special sauces: reactivity, text messaging, an extensible constraint system). Fortunately, the ICS degree program provides a wealth of advanced material for you to apply to your HACC application: security, recommendation engines, advanced visualizations, concurrent programming, machine learning, robotics, game mechanics, medical informatics, etc. You might even consider using Raspberry PI or Arduino boards to craft an Internet of Things solution. 

*Try to have users.*  

*Build it for Hawaii and for your portfolio, not for the judges.* 








  
